================================================================================
TITLE: Spin Effect-Induced layer spacing Adaptation in vanadium bronze cathodes for Fast Zinc-Ion storage
DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2025.163086
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2025.163086
PUBLISHER: ELSEVIER
================================================================================

MAIN TEXT:
----------------------------------------
[Paragraph 8]
Graphical abstract

      

The cathode material of aqueous zinc-ion batteries is a critical constraint on their further application due to the poor structure stability. Consequently, understanding their charge-discharge mechanisms and developing high-performance materials are key to promoting their use. This study investigates the effect of dopant atoms, particularly manganese (Mn), on the properties of vanadium bronze (MVO). Mn, with its larger ionic radius and higher d-electron count, enhanced the electrochemical properties of MVO: the specific capacity is up to 370 mAh/g @100 mA/g and has good rate performance, with a capacity of about 300 mAh/g at 1000 mA/g, a capacity retention rate of 92 % after 2000 cycles and showed the excellent capacity and stability. Mn was present in both the interlayers and within the vanadium bronze structure, promoting the self-adaptive and a more pronounced electron transfer with the metal-oxygen bonds in the structure. This enhanced the covalent character of the metal-oxygen bonds and improved the intrinsic conductivity. The results of in-situ Raman and SQUID measurements revealed changes in Mn-O bond lengths on molecular and atom level and the intrinsic nature of the "pillar effect". These findings provide new insights into ion-doping strategies for enhancing electrochemical performance in zinc-ion batteries.

[Paragraph 10]
Data availability

The authors do not have permission to share data.

Introduction

The increasing severity of the energy crisis and introduction of dual-carbon policies have led to the rapid development of green energy . As an important part of the green energy sector, energy storage has attracted considerable research attention . Moreover, compared with other energy storage methods, aqueous zinc-ion batteries (AZIBs) offer a wide range of applications owing to their safety, affordability, ease of production, and environmental friendliness . The cathode material is an important factor affecting their performance and practical application , the common cathode materials being manganese (Mn)-based, vanadium-based, and Prussian-blue-based cathodes and their derivatives. Mn-based materials have a higher platform voltage, rendering them ideal cathode candidates; however, they suffer from poor intrinsic conductivity, low specific capacity, and dissolution during cycling, leading to limited lifespan ; Prussian-blue compounds have an open framework structure; hence, they have a more stable discharge and higher platform voltage. However, their framework structure is unstable; thus, they decay rapidly during the cycling process. Moreover, their intrinsic conductivity is poor, which restricts their further application .

[Paragraph 11]
Consequently, vanadium-based materials, with their layered structure, variable valence, high intrinsic conductivity and specific capacity, have attracted research attention because of their considerable application potential. Accordingly, extensive studies have been conducted on vanadium-based cathode materials .

[Paragraph 12]
Vanadium bronze is a typical class of vanadium-based compounds , named for its green coloration, which occurs when specific atoms are embedded in vanadium oxides. It exhibits good electrical conductivity and theoretical specific capacity as vanadium usually exists in a form of mixed valence states while retaining a layered structure . However, during the cycling process, owing to electrostatic interactions and the insertion/deinsertion of zinc ions, the stress on the cathode material structure can lead to instability of the layered structure, reducing its cycling performance .

[Paragraph 13]
Accordingly, numerous studies  have proposed various solutions to resolve this problem, such as defect engineering , carbon composite incorporation , morphology modulation , and heterojunction construction . The introduction of heteroatoms is a simple and effective modification method, involving the introduction of alkali metal or alkaline-earth metal ions with large ionic radii , and the use of the pillar effect to expand the interlayer spacing, which is conducive to the insertion and deinsertion of ions. Additionally, Mn exists in a mixed-valence state (Mn2+ and Mn3+), facilitating charge transfer with various vanadium ions, enhancing covalency and intrinsic conductivity .

[Paragraph 14]
The stability of chemical bonds during charging and discharging significantly impacts cycling performance, representing the intrinsic nature of the pillar effect. Introducing ions with varying charges redistributes electrons locally, improving the chemical-bonding strength and enhancing the overall stability and cycling performance of the material.

[Paragraph 15]
In this study, a simple hydrothermal method was used to introduce Mn ions into the lattice structure of vanadium bronze H2V3O8 (HVO) to obtain a Mn-doped vanadium bronze compound (MVO). Compared with the nanowire morphology of HVO, the morphology of MVO is changed by the Mn doping; the preferred orientation of the vanadium bronze is in the form of ultrathin nanosheets. Mn replaces the position of some V atoms in the vanadium bronze and can be pre-inserted in the interlayer. This not only increases the oxygen vacancy in the structure but also makes the structure more stable (by means of charge transfer in the structure). Moreover, Mn-doped vanadium bronze exhibits improved specific capacity, rate performance, and cycling stability. Electrochemical kinetics and in-situ distribution of relaxation time (DRT) studies showed that Mn doping effectively enhances conductivity, reduces polarization, and improves the pseudocapacitance contribution and diffusion coefficient of Zn ions. In-situ Raman studies demonstrated that the spectral results of the Mn-doped structure were reversible during the charging and discharging process, indicating the excellent structural stability of MVO. The SQUID results showed that different Mn valences could change the M-O bond length during the charging and discharging process, rendering the vanadium bronze adaptive to Zn ion storage. The doped structure exhibited good reversibility, which ultimately enhanced the cycling stability. This study provides a new understanding of ion doping for enhancing electrochemical performance.

[Paragraph 16]
Experimental

Synthesis of manganese (Mn)-doped vanadium bronzes

Using 0.727 g (4 mmol) of V2O5 (Sinopharm) in a beaker, we added 50 mL of ultrapure water (dispersed uniformly) before adding oxalic acid (Sinopharm) at a molar ratio of 1:2 with V2O5. The solution was stirred well and then transferred into the liner of a 100 mL polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) hydrothermal kettle. Mn-doped samples were prepared by adding manganese acetate (Sinopharm) in molar ratios of 5 %, 10 %, 15 %, and 20 % relative to V2O5. The mixture was placed in a blast oven at 200 °C for 12 h, and then allowed to naturally cool to room temperature. The target product was washed with ultrapure water and anhydrous ethanol alternately three times, filtered, and then vacuum-dried in a vacuum oven at 70 °C for 48 h. The Mn-doped samples were labeled as 5 %, 10 %, 15 %, and 20 % MVO based on their molar ratio. The undoped samples were labeled as HVO.

[Paragraph 17]
Characterizations

The phase identification was performed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 ADVANCE, Germany) Cu Kα, λ = 0.154 nm, scanning in the range 10-80° in 0.02° steps at a scanning speed of 10°/min; scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Thermo Fisher Apreo 2, USA) with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV and using secondary electron plus backscatter electron imaging and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F, Japan) were used to observe the morphology and structure of the powders with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV, The structure and crystalline spacing of materials were observed by bright-field mode. The elemental components of materials were studied by energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS, UltimMax TEM, Oxford, Britain), with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV, the dead time ratio is less than 10 %, and acquisition time is about 5 min. X-ray electron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher, USA) was used to scan the surface oxidation state of the samples for full, element-specific fine, and valence band spectra. Which equipped with Al Kα X-ray source, hν = 1486.6 eV, the beam size was 500 μm, pass energy was in CAE mode, 30.0 eV for fine spectrum and 100.0 eV for full spectrum, energy step was 0.1 eV, The scanning times of spectrum are 10 times, vacuum degree of the analysis chamber is 10-8 Pa, Avantage software was used to fitting and charge compensation . Molecular vibrational spectroscopy was conducted using Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw inVia confocal microscope, Britain), 532 nm laser was applied in Raman test, and the laser power was 10 % for powder, 50 % for in-situ test, observation and focusing with a 50x microscope. The in-situ electrochemical Raman spectroscopy was conducted using the above Raman spectroscopy coupled with a Donghua 7000D electrochemical workstation, which was charged and discharged using the chronoamperometry (CA) method. Subsequently, the samples were stored for a period of time, and the spectra were obtained using Raman spectroscopy. The oxygen vacancies and single electrons of vanadium ions were tested using an electron spin resonance spectrometer (ESR, Bruker A300, USA). Temperature-dependent magnetization curves (zero field cooling mode) were tested by superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID, Quantum Design, MPMS3, USA) in 5-350 K with 5 K min-1. The doping content of Mn was analyzed by ICP-OES (iCAP 7400, Thermo, USA).

[Paragraph 18]
Battery assembly and electrochemical tests

Here, 140 mg of synthesized and dried vanadium bronze (HVO) and Mn-doped vanadium bronze (MVO) were used. Super P conductive carbon black and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder were mixed and milled in a mass ratio of 7:2:1 to form a homogeneous slurry, which was coated on titanium foil using stainless steel spatulas (90 μm thick), and dried for 12 h at 80 °C. Subsequently, the electrodes were sliced into 14 mm diameter electrodes (with approximately 1.5 mg of active substance on the electrodes) for battery assembly. A 3 M zinc trifluoromethanesulfonate solution was used as the electrolyte, after which 0.2 M MnSO4 was added to the electrolyte to inhibit the dissolution of Mn in the cell with MVO as the positive electrode.

[Paragraph 19]
The aqueous zinc-ion batteries were assembled using a CR2032 battery mold, in which the negative shell, reed, stainless steel plate, zinc plate, glass fiber separator dripping with electrolyte, electrode materials, and positive shell were secured in place and then pressurized using a battery crimper at a pressure of 50 MPa. The assembled batteries were used for the subsequent electrochemical tests. The electrochemical parameters were measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV) at different sweep rates and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at different voltages using an Autolab PGSTAT 302 N electrochemical workstation. The frequency of EIS test was from 1 MHz to 10 mHz, and the amplitude was 10 mV. For EIS test under applied potentials, the constant current and constant voltage method was used in charge and discharge, when the current was lower than 0.05C, the test starts. The DRT data were processed using Relaxis III software.

[Paragraph 20]
Results and discussion

Structural and morphological

The XRD patterns of the synthesized vanadium bronze (H2V3O8, HVO) before and after Mn doping are shown in  (a)-1(b). The characteristic peaks of vanadium bronze were consistent with PDF No. 85-2401. The crystal structure was orthorhombic. With increasing Mn doping, the XRD patterns showed some regular changes: the diffraction peaks of the (200) and (110) facets located at 10-11° and the (310) and (020) crystal planes around 18° gradually weakened; the diffraction peaks of the (011) facet near 26° and (411) crystal plane near 33° gradually improved. These changes exhibited a certain preferred orientation, suggesting that the Mn may have occupied or replaced the positions of the H atoms in the interlayers of HVO and replaced the V atoms in the crystal structure during the doping process, altering the original HVO morphology. In the locally enlarged XRD results ((b)), the peak width and intensity of the (011) facet near 26° gradually increased with increasing of Mn content, which could be attributed to the Mn doping changing the selective orientation of the crystals and the morphology of the product. The peak shifts between 26° and 31° indicated an initial shift to a lower angle, followed by a shift to a higher angle as observed in the 15 % MVO sample. This could be because the Mn doping changed the spacing of the crystal planes to a certain extent. For example, after a certain amount of doping, the Mn ions entered the interlayer of the vanadium bronze, reducing the spacing of the crystal planes .

[Paragraph 21]
Further, the Raman spectra of the synthesized vanadium bronze before and after Mn doping were measured, the results of which are shown in (c). Eight characteristic peaks were located at 281, 408, 481, 527, 690, 833, 921, and 992 cm-1 which belonged to the structural vibrations of HVO . The peaks at 281 and 408 cm-1 could be attributed to the V=O bond bending vibration ; the peak at 527 cm-1 could be attributed to the V3-O stretching (caused by the shared edge of the three octahedra) ; the stretching vibration at 690 cm-1 was caused by the V2-O shared by the corner ; and the characteristic peak at 992 cm-1 was caused by the unshared V=O stretching vibration of neighboring atoms at the edge position . After amplification ((d)), there were some differences between the Mn-doped and original samples. With increased doping, the peak intensity of the doped Raman spectrum weakened as a whole, with the characteristic peaks at the 992 cm-1 being the most obvious, perhaps owing to the defects appearing in the crystal structure during the doping process. The characteristic peaks at 877 cm-1 belonged to the V-O-V bending vibration, which disappeared after Mn doping, whereas the peak at 921 cm-1 gradually strengthened with increased Mn doping, moving to a lower wave number (which implied that the addition of Mn could have replaced the V atoms in the HVO structure to form the V-O-Mn bond).

[Paragraph 22]
The morphology of vanadium bronze before and after Mn doping is shown in  . The SEM images are shown in (a)-2(b) and Fig. S1. The overall morphology of the HVO samples comprised nanowires that were stacked and homogeneous. The nanowires were approximately 40 μm long, 200 nm wide, and of a certain thickness with an aspect ratio of approximately 200. After Mn doping, the overall morphology changed from being nanowires to being stacked nanosheets. Compared to that of the HVO samples, the thickness of the MVO nanosheets was reduced to a few nanometers gradually. The length was considerably reduced to approximately 6 μm and the width to approximately 1 μm (with an aspect ratio of approximately 6, which was dramatically reduced). When used as an electrode material, it could increase the redox reactions on the surface during the charging and discharging process, enhancing the contribution of the pseudocapacitance.

[Paragraph 23]
The TEM images of the MVO are shown in (c)-2(e). This sample exhibited a stacked ultrathin nanosheet morphology ((c)), and (011) and (220) crystal facets with crystal spacings of 0.346 and 0.416 nm were evident on the nanosheet surface, indicating that vanadium bronze has been synthesized successfully. The Fourier transform results (inset of (d)) showed that the main diffraction spots exhibited blurry, which implied that they were poorly crystalline and rich in defects. All the crystal facet in (d) were well indexed in the FFT image, moreover, the (020) facet in another view (Fig. S2) further verified the prepared vanadium bronze. The ultrathin nanosheet structure could expose more active sites and defects on the surface, permitting the performance to be improved in the electrode materials compared to the HVO materials.

[Paragraph 24]
The EDS mapping results ((e)) showed that Mn, V, and O were present on the sample surface. The elemental distribution was uniform, and the proportion of Mn in the metal atoms was about 8.1 % (Fig. S3 and Tab. S1), which was consistent with the results of the experimental design, indicating that the added Mn was in the form of ionic doping into the vanadium bronze.

[Paragraph 25]
Chemical valences and bonds

   shows the spectral characterization results of HVO and MVO (15 %) associated with chemical valence and bonding. (a) shows the results of electron spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR), with two characteristic peaks in the scanning region, which were located at g = 1.96, and 2.003, corresponding to the paramagnetic vanadium atoms and oxygen vacancies, respectively. Both the peaks were strengthened after Mn doping. Moreover, g = 1.96 denoted the characteristic peak of vanadium atoms with a single electron, here denoted as V4+ ([Ar]3d1) , which suggested that the addition of Mn ions could transfer electrons with the vanadium ions in MVO, reducing V5+ to V4+, and increasing the number of oxygen vacancies in the structure simultaneously.

[Paragraph 26]
(b) shows the results of the valence band spectra of the two materials. Here, the overall MVO valence band moved toward the Fermi level while keeping the original Fermi level unchanged, which enhanced the covalency of the system and led to better conductivity of the material. Fig. S4 shows the XPS full spectrum results before and after Mn doping. The full spectrum of HVO displayed characteristic peaks of C 1s, V 2p, and O 1s. In the MVO spectrum, in addition to the aforementioned characteristic peaks, additional peaks of Mn 3s and 2p were observed, indicating that Mn doping had been successfully incorporated into the HVO structure. Fig. S5 shows the fine-spectrum results of the 3s and 2p peaks of Mn, the fitted parameters of the XPS fine spectrum being listed in Tab. S2. As shown in Fig. S5(a), the deconvolution peaks of Mn 3s were 83.6 and 89.3 eV respectively. The difference in the binding energies between the two peaks was 5.7 eV, which was larger than the 5.5 eV of divalent Mn and smaller than the 5.9 eV of trivalent Mn, that is, the Mn was in a mixed-valence state of +2, +3 . Similarly, in the 2p fine-spectrum results (Fig. S5(b)), the characteristic peaks of Mn were appropriately divided into mixed-valence states of +2 and + 3, suggesting that there was electron transfer between Mn and V in the MVO, that is, a part of the Mn valence was changed from +2 to + 3, reducing some V5+ to V4+.

[Paragraph 27]
The fine spectra of V and O are shown in (c)-3(d). The XPS results for V can be deconvolved into the peaks of V4+ and V5+ . After Mn doping, V4+ moved to high binding energy, which may be due to the interaction of V4+ with Mn ion by means of O, in which the electron transfer makes the binding energy higher; in the fine spectrum of O, the 1s peak of O can be divided into 3 parts: lattice oxygen, oxygen in adsorbed hydroxyl (OOH) and oxygen in irreversibly adsorbed water on the surface (Oads) . The area ratio of lattice oxygen was basically unchanged after Mn doping, while the peaks of O in hydroxyl decreased, which may be due to the fact that doped manganese entered into the interlayers of the crystal lattice, which affects the number of -OH. The peak of water adsorption was increased, which may be due to the change of hydrophilicity of the material after doping. . These results implied that the overall internal valence decreased, which could be attributed to the fact that more d electrons were provided by the addition of Mn.

[Paragraph 28]
Battery performance studies

The synthesized samples were used as cathode materials for electrochemical and battery tests. Fig. S6 presents the charge/discharge curves of the materials before and after Mn doping for the first few cycles (100 mA/g), which show that the discharge capacities of HVO and MVO were lower during the first cycle, indicating that the materials were embedded with Zn ions for the first time. The specific capacities of the two materials increased rapidly during the second cycle, followed by slow increases in their specific capacities and stabilities during the fourth cycle. In the 15 % MVO charge/discharge curve, a smaller plateau is evident around 1.3-1.4 V, corresponding to the insertion/deinsertion of H+ . Moreover, when the specific capacities and cycling stabilities of the samples before and after Mn doping were initially tested (100 mA/g, Fig. S7), the HVO exhibited a specific capacity of ~400 mAh/g after stabilization, followed by a rapid decay to only ~260 mAh/g after 50 cycles, with a decay of more than 30 %. The 5 % MVO exhibited an optimal initial capacity of ~500 mAh/g but also decayed rapidly. By contrast, the 15 % MVO exhibited a similar initial capacity to HVO and still had more than 90 % specific capacity (370 mAh/g) after 50 cycles, indicating that the addition of Mn effectively enhanced the stability of the vanadium bronze structure. In order to abbreviation, MVO in the following text default refers to 15 % MVO. The effect of Mn doping on the electrochemical performance of HVO was further investigated by comparing the charge and discharge curves under the same specific current conditions ( (a)). The MVO exhibited a higher charging-discharging specific capacity, higher discharge plateau, and lower charging plateau, indicating that the lower electrochemical polarization of MVO implied that Mn doping led to better conductivity of the electrode material.

[Paragraph 29]
The differential capacity curves (Fig. S8) were also examined. In the charging and discharging range, the HVO exhibited two pairs of redox peaks, and a large voltage difference between the reduction peak around 0.7 V and the oxidation peak at 1.1 V, which implied a larger polarization. The MVO exhibited three pairs of redox peaks, which meant that there existed an insertion/deinsertion mechanism of H+ and Zn2+ during the charging and discharging process. The redox peaks around 1.3 V were for the H+ embedding/de-embedding process, and the two pairs of redox peaks below 1.2 V corresponded to the oxidation and reduction of V ions, which was manifested as the surface adsorption and insertion/deinsertion reaction inside the lattice . In this voltage range, the MVO exhibited a lower oxidation and higher reduction peak voltage, which indicated a higher discharge and lower charging voltage, that is, a smaller electrochemical polarization.

[Paragraph 30]
The CV test results are shown in (b). Here, the CV curve of HVO exhibited a triangular shape, corresponding to a larger polarization, whereas the MVO CV curve exhibited more obvious redox peaks than those of the HVO. The redox peaks of 1.38 and 1.30 V corresponded to the insertion/de-insertion reaction of proton; the oxidation and reduction peaks of 1.19 and 0.84 V showed the redox reaction of V4+and V5+ and the others two peaks indicated the redox reactions of V3+ and V4+ . The curve had better symmetry, consistent with more obvious electrochemical reactions (ionic adsorption/desorption on the surface and diffusion reactions within the lattice) during the charging and discharging process. Moreover, the voltage difference between the redox peaks was smaller, consistent with Fig. S8, indicating that the addition of Mn effectively enhanced the electrical conductivity and reduced the polarization.

[Paragraph 31]
Subsequently, rate tests were conducted for the HVO and MVO (Figs. S9 and 4(c)), that is, the specific capacities of MVO at 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, and 5000 mA/g were 432, 408, 363, 308, 218, and 110 mAh/g, respectively, exhibiting excellent specific capacities and near 100 % Coulombic efficiency compared to HVO (Fig. S9) at higher rates ((c)). From the charge/discharge curves under different rate conditions (Figs. S10 and 4(d)), the polarization of the curves increased with increasing current density; however, the MVO plateau could still be maintained during the charging and discharging process.

[Paragraph 32]
(e) shows the results of the long-cycle test compared with the lower specific capacity of HVO (Fig. S11). Evidently, the MVO could be cycled for 2,000 cycles at a specific capacity of 290 mAh/g and still exhibit a 92 % retention rate with a Coulombic efficiency close to 100 %. Which is excellent among the current works (the comparison was listed in Tab. S3). The Ragone plot was shown in Fig. S12, where the MVO exhibit 225.8 Wh kg-1 at 383.4 W kg-1, which has excellent energy and power density in the current works (Tab. S4). Compared to that in the original vanadium bronze HVO, in MVO, the addition of Mn generated more oxygen vacancies, stabilized the lattice structure, reduced the polarization, and improved the specific capacity and cycling stability of the material.

[Paragraph 33]
Electrochemical kinetic studies

The zinc-ion storage mechanism was further elucidated by electrochemical kinetic-related investigations. The synthesized HVO and MVO were tested using CV at different scan rates (Figs. S13 and 5(a)). In the scanning range, the MVO exhibited three pairs of redox peaks (labeled as P1-P6). The relationship between these peak currents and the sweep rate could be expressed as follows :  (1)   I = a  ν b

[Paragraph 34]
The b value shows the type of rate determined step (ion diffusion or surface reaction). From the fitting results ( (b)), P1 and P2 corresponded to the embedding/de-embedding reaction of H+ . The de-embedding of H+ conformed to the pseudocapacitive behavior (b ~ 1), the embedding process being consistent with the mix mechanism of surface and diffusion control (b = 0.79); P3-P4 corresponded to the redox reaction of + 4, +5 valence vanadium ions, both of which conformed to pseudocapacitive behavior (b ~ 1), and belonged to the surface reaction control; P5-P6 belonged to the redox of V3+ and V4+, accompanied by the diffusion process of Zn2+ in the crystal structure (b = 0.71, 0.78). Evidently, with increasing discharging depth, the Zn2+ gradually transformed from the surface reaction rate control to the ionic diffusion control; in other words, the redox reaction gradually transferred from the surface to the bulk phase of the MVO.

[Paragraph 35]
The pseudocapacitance contribution can be expressed as follows:  (2)   I    V    =  k 1  ν +  k 2   ν  1 / 2       

Fig. S14 and 5(c)-5(d) show the pseudocapacitance contributions of the two materials. The pseudocapacitance contribution of the HVO material was mainly in the region above 1 V, with a smaller pseudocapacitance contribution in the low-voltage range, which could have a large internal resistance. The charging and discharging mechanism could be dominated by ionic diffusion. Conversely, the MVO had more contribution in the cyclic range, which was dominated by the surface redox mechanism, and thus exhibited a smaller internal resistance. The pseudocapacitance contribution increased with rising scan rate, with the MVO pseudocapacitance contributions being 56.57 %, 60.13 %, 62.12 %, 64.98 %, 68.55 %, and 72.21 % at scan rates of 0.2-1.2 mV/s, respectively. These results were higher than those of the HVO at the same scan rate, which could be attributed to the fact that the lamellar morphology of the MVO was more favorable to surface reaction compared with that of the nanowires ((a)-2(b)).

[Paragraph 36]
Moreover, the impedance variation during the charging and discharging processes was investigated using in-situ EIS and distribution of relaxation time (DRT). From the results shown in Fig. S15(a), the overall HVO impedance was large (up to approximately 650 Ω). The impedance changed as it gradually increased in the 0.55 to 1.00 V range, reaching its maximum at 1.00 V. Subsequently, the impedance decreased rapidly with the charging process, before stabilizing at approximately 150 Ω at 1.60 V. This trend was similar to that of the CV in the positive sweep results shown in Fig. S14, which suggested that the impedance was smaller in the region with a large pseudocapacitance contribution (which could be due to the surface reaction being lower than that of ion diffusion).

[Paragraph 37]
In the MVO sample (Fig. S15(b)), the maximum resistance was only approximately 150 Ω, which indicated that the conductivity of the doping-modified sample had improved. This sample had the largest impedance initially, after which the impedance diminished as the charging proceeded, consistent with the pseudocapacitance contribution of the CV positive sweeping process of MVO, as shown in (c). During the discharging process (Fig. S16), both samples gradually increased in impedance, which was consistent with the pseudocapacitance contribution of the negative sweeping part in the CV curve. However, the maximum impedance of the HVO sample was approximately 650 Ω (Fig. S16(a)), whereas the maximum resistance of the MVO was approximately 180 Ω (Fig. S16(b)), a considerable decrease after modification. The in-situ impedance data were transformed into DRT results. Compared with the MVO, the HVO impedance (Fig. S17) was consistently larger than that of the MVO at the same potential, demonstrating its larger polarization during the charging/discharging process. This could be classified into four electrochemical reaction peaks P1-P4, corresponding to the interaction of Zn2+ with the solid electrolyte interface layer (SEI), charge transfer, electrochemical double layer process (ion adsorption and desorption on the surface of the electrode), and ion diffusion . During the HVO charging and discharging process, the position of P1 was located within the 10-2.5 s time scale, implying that Zn2+ had poor kinetic conditions on the SEI, at lower potentials. The P2 impedance was higher than that of P3, indicating that the electrical conductivity was poor at this time, which was not conducive to the subsequent step of the electrochemical double layer, that is, the ionic transfer process. For the MVO ((e)-5(f)), a smaller impedance was consistently maintained, demonstrating a high conductivity. The position of P1 was in the 10-3.5 s time range, implying that Zn2+ could quickly pass through the SEI layer. The resistance was elevated at lower potentials, which implied that the conductivity of the material was reduced in this potential range. This behavior was reversible in the charging and discharging processes, indicating that the Mn-doped structure exhibited good electrochemical stability.

[Paragraph 38]
Consequently, the Zn2+ diffusion coefficients of the two materials were studied using the GITT, expressed as follows :  (3)    D   Zn   2 +    =  4  π τ          m B   V M    M B      2    (    Δ E  s    Δ E  τ   )  2

[Paragraph 39]
where mB  (g), MB  (g/mol), and VM  (cm3/mol) denote the mass loading of the active substance, molar mass, and molar volume, respectively, S (cm2) denotes the area of the electrode in contact with the electrolyte, τ (s) denotes the pulse time, and ΔE S (V) and ΔE τ (V) denotes the voltage differences between the relaxation and pulsation processes, respectively.

[Paragraph 40]
The test results for the electrode materials are shown in (g)-5(h). The GITT curves show an overall zigzag shape, and the insets of (g) show that the MVO exhibited a smaller iR drop than that of the HVO, implying that it had a smaller internal resistance , which could be favorable for the Zn2+ diffusion process. In the diffusion coefficient results ((h)), evidently, the shapes of the curves of the two materials were similar during the testing process, implying that the electrochemical reactions during the charging and discharging processes were similar. However, the MVO diffusion coefficients were consistently better than those of the HVO, which suggested that the introduction of Mn increased the layer spacing of the structure, which contributed to the diffusion of Zn2+.

[Paragraph 41]
Mechanisms of zinc ion storage

The storage mechanism of Zn ions in the cathode was investigated, and the samples were characterized by XPS before and after the charging and discharging process (Fig. S18). In the fine Zn spectrum (Fig. S18(a)), no signals were evident in the pristine Zn electrodes. With the discharging up to 0.4 V, there was a considerable increase of Zn signals, which implied that a large quantity of Zn was adsorbed on the surface of the material. After the charging process, the Zn signal decreased, indicating that a portion of the ions were desorbed. The oxygen elements in the pristine electrode were similar to those of the MVO powder, which could be divided into lattice oxygen, surface oxygen (hydroxyl in surface), and adsorbed oxygen (water species). After the discharging process, the binding energy of the O elements increased, which implied that Zn2+ was adsorbed and embedded in the lattice in the form of multicoordinated water (Zn⋅nH2O)2+. Moreover, after the charging process, oxygen existed in a broad peak form, the surface oxygen peaks weakened, and the lattice oxygen and defect oxygen peaks improved and shifted to higher binding energy, implying that Zn ion desorption could cause an increase in defects and metal element valence, leading to an increase in the binding energy (Fig. S18(b)). The fine Zn and O spectra of the HVO (Figs. S18(d)-18(e)) were similar to those of the HVO. In the fine vanadium spectra, the peaks after the discharging process exhibited high noise, indicating that the surface vanadium content was low, owing to the adsorption of a large amount of water and Zn ions on the surface after discharge, resulting in poor signals.

[Paragraph 42]
Comparing the original sample with the charging-over sample, the sample at 0.4 V exhibited +3, +4, and +5 valences of vanadium, indicating that the surface of the sample was reduced during the discharging process (Fig. S18(c)). However, the binding energies after charging were generally positively shifted, implying an oxidation reaction of the electrode material during the charging process. Compared to the MVO sample, the HVO V fine-spectrum results (Fig. S18(f)) exhibited a similar trend to those of the MVO; however, the spectrum after the discharging process exhibited more distinctive peaks, which implied that there were fewer Zn ions and water molecules on the surface of the material, that is, there were fewer surface reactions during the discharging process and the Zn ions had a weaker interaction with the electrode material.

[Paragraph 43]
The interaction between the Zn ions and the cathode materials during the charging and discharging processes was investigated by in-situ Raman spectroscopy, the results of which are shown in  (a)-6(d) and Fig. S19. During the charging and discharging of the HVO (Fig. S19), no regular peak changes were evident, with only some characteristic peaks of Zn salts appearing, implying that no interaction between the Zn ions and HVO was found. However, during the MVO charging process, some interesting phenomena appeared ( (a)-6(b)), that is, the peak at 268 cm-1 could be attributed to the characteristic peak of V=O bending vibration, which was enhanced by the desorption of Zn ions on the surface as the voltage increased; the peaks near 700 cm-1 (V-O-V stretching vibration, (a)) exhibited a tendency to be blue shifted and then red shifted (blue shifted at 0.40-1.00 V and red shifted at 1.15-1.75 V), implying a change in the elasticity of the chemical bonds. The peaks at 164 and 174 cm-1 located at low wave numbers corresponded to structural (lattice) vibrations , implying changes in the MVO surface and interlayers, with the peak at 164 cm-1 representing lattice vibrations affected by hydrogen bonding. During the charging process, this peak exhibited a tendency to increase and then decrease. The peak intensity reached a maximum at 0.55 V, implying that the Zn ions were most abundant on the surface of the electrode at this time. Moreover, as the voltage increased, the ions were desorbed from the interlayer and electrode surface, and the peak at 164 cm-1 decreased at approximately 1.0 V, whereas the peak at 174 cm-1 started to appear discrete from the 164 cm-1 peak (most obviously at 1.75 V), indicating that the Zn ions were desorbed. The peak at 210 cm-1 could represent the interaction of hydrated Zn ions with the MVO, the variation of the peak intensity being in synchrony with the peak at 164 cm-1; moreover, it reached a maximum at 0.55 V, before gradually decreasing or even disappearing ((b)).

[Paragraph 44]
The discharging process ((c)-6(d)) exhibited the opposite phenomenon to the above; that is, the characteristic peak at 268 cm-1 (V=O bending vibration) weakened as the voltage decreased and the Zn ions were adsorbed on the surface. The wave number of 700 cm-1 exhibited a blue shift first and then a red shift after 1.00 V, indicating the charging and discharging process. The two peaks were more discrete at 1.60 V, before they gradually merged. The 164 cm1 characteristic peak gradually increased with discharging time and reached a maximum at 0.60 V, before decreasing, that is, the MVO structure demonstrated reversible change. This indicated that the microstructure of Mn-doped vanadium bronze exhibited better stability during the charging and discharging process and that the addition of Mn played an important role in the stability of the material.

[Paragraph 45]
The role of Mn in the material structure was further investigated using a SQUID magnetometer to analyze the magnetic properties of the material and infer the spin state in which the Mn was located. The results are shown in (e) and 6(f). For the MVO, the initial magnetic momentum was higher than that of the HVO at low temperatures, implying that there were more defects or single electrons in the structure. With increasing temperature, the magnetic momentum of both materials decreased rapidly and transformed into paramagnetism at approximately 100 K ((e)). After fitting by the Curie-Weiss law, it was evident that the magnetic moment of the HVO was 0.44 μB, and that of the Mn-doped sample was 0.53 μB ((f)), which meant that the addition of Mn resulted in an increase in the overall magnetic moment. The average magnetic moment of the Mn was 1.56 μB, which indicated that Mn was present in the form of high spin (HS) Mn2+ (5 μB) and low spin (LS) Mn3+ (0 μB). Considering the ratio of Mn2+ and Mn3+ based on the previous XPS results, the average magnetic moment of Mn was 1.8 μB, which was similar with the SQUID results.

[Paragraph 46]
DFT simulation

The effect of the chemical bonds formed after Mn doping on the structure was further investigated by DFT simulations ( ). The optimized structures are shown in Fig. S20. The differential charge results ((a)-7(b)) demonstrated that there were electron depletion and aggregation regions around the metal atoms and oxygen atoms, respectively. Moreover, the doped Mn atoms exhibited a considerable electron transfer near the lamellar structure, which led to electron aggregation in the metal-oxygen bonds, reducing the electrostatic effect generated by the migration of Zn2+. This had an optimizing effect on the structural stability.

[Paragraph 47]
The projected densities of states (PDOSs) of the HVO and MVO were calculated ( (c) and Fig. S21). The HVO exhibited a lower density of state near the Fermi level and a larger band gap (~1 eV), implying poorer conductivity. In the PDOS of the MVO, the density of states of Mn was located near the Fermi level (making an affluent orbital here), and reducing the band gap (0.4 eV) considerably, implying that Mn doping could effectively modulate the electronic structure near the Fermi level and increase the intrinsic conductivity of the material.

[Paragraph 48]
Finally, the activation energies of the Zn ions migrating in the structures were calculated ((d)), the migration paths of which are shown in Fig. S22. The migration energies of Zn2+ in the MVO structure were lower than those in the HVO, which was consistent with the results of the differential charge, implying that the addition of Mn reduced the electrostatic effect during ion migration, which was favorable for the embedding and disembedding of Zn2+ in the layered structure.

[Paragraph 49]
DFT simulations showed that the stability of the metal-oxygen bonding and structure was optimized by the addition of d-electron-rich Mn, which improved the electrical conductivity, reduced the ion diffusion barrier, and facilitated the insertion-deinsertion and diffusion of Zn2+ into the structure. The coexistence of mixed-valence Mn in the structure (in the form of HS and LS) implied that the length of the Mn-O bond was variable, enabling the vanadium bronze structure to self-adapt to the storage of Zn ions. This effectively reduced the stress and electrostatic effects during the Zn ion insertion and deinsertion process, enhancing the stability of the structure, and improving the conductivity and cycling stability of the electrode ((e)).

[Paragraph 50]
In summary, to investigate the stability of vanadium-based cathode materials, vanadium bronzes with different Mn doping content were synthesized via a simple hydrothermal method. This was done in an attempt to use the larger ionic radius and higher d-electron count of Mn to provide chemical bonding support between the vanadium bronze layers and facilitate electron transfer through metal-oxygen bonds inside the structure. The Mn-doped material exhibited improved specific capacity, rate performance, and cycling stability. After a series of characterizations, it was evident that Mn was present in the form of +2 and +3 valences in the structure. Moreover, there was electron transfer with metal-oxygen bonds, which enhanced the covalent effect and optimized the stability of the metal-oxygen bonding in the structure. In-situ and SQUID studies demonstrated that this effect could enhance the conductivity of the material, reduce polarization, and facilitate the diffusion of Zn ions in the structure. The length of the Mn-O bond changed with Mn valence changes, which had an adaptive effect during the charging and discharging process, rendering the structure highly reversible and ultimately enhancing the overall performance of the cathode material. This study provides a new perspective and understanding of the use of ion doping methods to enhance the performance and structural design of electrode materials.

[Paragraph 51]
CRediT authorship contribution statement

 Yue Wang: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Haoran Zou: Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Investigation, Formal analysis. Zihao Wang: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Lincheng Xu: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Yong Yan: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis. Yingjie Feng: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Formal analysis. Xin Chen: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Software, Formal analysis. Dong Wang: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization. Fan Li: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Software, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

[Paragraph 52]
Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2025.163086.

Supplementary data

The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  Supplementary Data 1


FIGURES:
----------------------------------------
[Figure 1]
Fig. 1  XRD (a), (b) and Raman spectra (c), (d) of the synthesized vanadium bronze samples.

[Figure 2]
Fig. 2  Morphological characterization of vanadium bronze: (a), (b) SEM images of HVO and MVO (15%); (c), (d) TEM and HRTEM images of MVO (15%); (e) EDS mapping results of MVO (15%).

[Figure 3]
Fig. 3  Valence bond characterization results for vanadium bronze materials: ESR (a), valence band spectrum (b), and XPS (c for V and d for O) of the HVO and MVO (15 %).

[Figure 4]
Fig. 4  Electrochemical and battery test results of vanadium bronze materials: (a) charge/discharge curves; (b) CV curves of HVO and MVO; (c) rate performance test with (d) charge/discharge curve and (e) long-cycle test of MVO.

[Figure 5]
Fig. 5  Kinetic study of MVO: (a) CV curves with different scan rates; (b) linear fitting results of b value; (c) distribution of pseudocapacitance in CV curve and (d) different scan rates; in-situ DRT result of (e) the charging and (f) discharging process; (g) GITT tests with inset detail curve and (h) diffusion coefficients of Zn2+ at different voltages.

[Figure 6]
Fig. 6  Structural evolution of vanadium bronze materials: (a), (b) Charging and (c), (d) discharging of MVO cathode materials; (e) M-T curves and (f) effective magnetic moments of HVO and MVO.

[Figure 7]
Fig. 7  DFT simulation of vanadium bronze materials: (a), (b) top and front view of differential charge; (c) PDOS of MVO and (d) activation energy barriers for migration paths of HVO and MVO; (e) Mechanism schematic of stability for Mn doped vanadium bronze in charge-discharge processes.

